



Network Working Group                                         D. Smullen
Internet-Draft                                                B. Scriber
Intended status: Informational                                 CableLabs
Expires: 21 November 2026                                    20 May 2026


                Privacy Preference Declaration Taxonomy
                   draft-dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy-latest

Abstract

   This document defines the core vocabulary, comparison model, and
   extension discipline used by Privacy Preference Declarations (PPDs)
   to express atomic privacy-relevant dataflows in home networks.  It
   complements the companion PPD architecture and protocol work by
   standardizing the semantic roles used in participant declarations and
   household policy rules.  The core vocabulary is the mandatory shared
   semantic floor for baseline participant-facing interoperability.
   Richer ecosystem-specific vocabularies remain possible, but
   comparison-relevant non-core terms need explicit relationships to the
   shared core so they remain computable.  Baseline participant-facing
   protocol messages use compact identifiers plus taxonomy context
   rather than requiring full ontology exchange on the wire.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://drspangle.github.io/draft-dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy/draft-
   dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy.html.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-dsmullen-ppd-
   taxonomy/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/drspangle/draft-dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 21 November 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Core Semantic Model
   4.  Design Goals
   5.  Core Semantic Floor and Extension Model
   6.  Core Taxonomy Structure
     6.1.  Data Type (What)
     6.2.  Purpose (Why)
     6.3.  Action (How)
     6.4.  Source (From Where)
     6.5.  Destination (To Where)
     6.6.  Dataflow Qualifiers
       6.6.1.  Retention
       6.6.2.  Processing Boundary
       6.6.3.  Jurisdiction
   7.  Subsumption and Comparison
   8.  Identifier Model
     8.1.  Stable Term Identifiers
     8.2.  Stability of Term Meanings
     8.3.  Compact Wire Form
     8.4.  Extension Namespaces and Core-Primitive Mapping
   9.  Use in PPD Messages
   10. Relationship to Richer Semantic Frameworks
   11. Security Considerations
   12. IANA Considerations
   13. References
     13.1.  Normative References
     13.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The Privacy Preference Declaration (PPD) architecture depends on a
   shared understanding of privacy-related semantics.
   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-architecture] defines the roles, trust
   boundaries, and lifecycle.  [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol] defines
   the participant-facing message flow and object structure.  This
   document defines the semantic roles and qualifier families used by
   those messages.

   The baseline PPD protocol carries atomic descriptive statements from
   device-side participants and atomic effective-policy rules from the
   household side.  This taxonomy treats those statements and rules as
   atomic privacy-relevant dataflows.  It defines the meaning of the
   role-fillers used in those dataflows and the minimum semantic
   discipline needed to compare them coherently across devices, vendors,
   and household deployments.

   The taxonomy is designed to be useful in constrained operational
   environments.  It therefore separates the stable meaning of core
   terms from any richer external semantic framework that might also
   describe them.  Implementations MAY use richer vocabularies, ontology
   representations, or local policy-analysis artifacts where useful, but
   baseline participant-facing interoperability depends on a shared
   computable semantic floor rather than on a full external reasoning
   stack.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Core Semantic Model

   The foundational semantic unit in this taxonomy is an atomic privacy-
   relevant dataflow.

   In the baseline PPD model:

   *  a Device Declaration Statement describes one participant-side
      dataflow case;

   *  a Policy Rule describes one household-side normative dataflow
      case; and

   *  comparison between participant behavior and household policy is
      grounded in comparison of those dataflows.

   A baseline atomic dataflow contains these five core role-fillers:

   *  data_type

   *  purpose

   *  action

   *  source

   *  destination

   It can also carry structured dataflow qualifiers.

   The rule effect, such as allow or deny, is not part of the dataflow
   tuple itself.  It belongs to the household-side policy-rule layer
   defined by [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol].

   This document does not define a household policy authoring workflow,
   a full conflict-resolution procedure, or a general reasoning engine.
   It defines the minimum semantic structure needed so participant
   declarations and household policy can be compared in an interoperable
   way.

4.  Design Goals

   *  Semantic Clarity: Provide stable, unambiguous meanings for
      privacy-related terms used in PPD messages.

   *  Core Primitive Coverage: Standardize the semantic roles needed by
      the baseline protocol rule and statement model.

   *  Compact Operational Use: Support compact identifiers in
      participant-facing JSON messages.

   *  Extensibility Without Fragmentation: Allow organization-specific
      vocabularies while requiring comparison-relevant extensions to
      remain reducible to the shared core.

   *  Validation and Comparison Support: Enable comparison of
      participant assertions and household policy without forcing every
      deployment to use a single heavy semantic framework.

   *  Interoperability: Preserve a shared computable semantic floor
      across vendors, device classes, and household deployments.

5.  Core Semantic Floor and Extension Model

   The baseline PPD core vocabulary is not intended to be the only
   vocabulary used in real deployments.  Device vendors, service
   providers, vertical ecosystems, and user-facing policy tools are
   expected to introduce richer concepts over time.

   The purpose of the core vocabulary is different.  It provides the
   minimum shared semantic substrate against which participant
   declarations and household policy can still be interpreted and
   compared when those richer vocabularies are present.

   For baseline participant-facing interoperability:

   *  core terms define the shared semantic floor;

   *  richer non-core terms MAY be used through the taxonomy context
      mechanism defined by [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol]; and

   *  when a non-core term or qualifier fills a comparison-relevant
      role, it MUST be defined with an explicit relationship or
      reduction to one or more core concepts sufficient to keep the term
      computable against the shared core model.

   Terms that do not carry such a relationship can still be locally
   meaningful, but they are outside baseline interoperable computation.

6.  Core Taxonomy Structure

   The baseline taxonomy consists of five core role-filler families plus
   selected dataflow qualifier families.  These are used together in
   atomic declaration statements and atomic effective-policy rules.

   The baseline core is intentionally small.  It is not meant to exhaust
   the full space of home-IoT data categories, service roles, or policy-
   authoring concepts.  Its purpose is to define the minimum shared set
   of computable primitives to which richer vocabularies can be related.
   Later taxonomy releases can add terms, but the initial core terms
   defined here are the mandatory baseline floor for interoperable
   computation.  The definitions in this section define the baseline
   meaning of those initial core terms.

6.1.  Data Type (What)

   Data Type terms identify the kind of data involved in the dataflow.
   Data Type participates in semantic comparison and can support
   broader-than/narrower-than relationships.

   The initial core term set is:

   *  ppd:temperatureReading: a measured temperature value associated
      with the participant device, its immediate environment, or an
      observed space.

   *  ppd:humidityReading: a measured humidity value associated with the
      participant device, its immediate environment, or an observed
      space.

   *  ppd:videoFrame: image or video-capture content obtained from a
      camera-like sensing path.

   *  ppd:eventClip: a bounded media segment retained or emitted because
      a triggering event or condition occurred.

   *  ppd:audioSample: audio-capture content obtained from a microphone-
      like sensing path.

   *  ppd:deviceIdentifier: an identifier associated with a device,
      participant, or device instance.

6.2.  Purpose (Why)

   Purpose terms identify the reason or operational objective for the
   handling.  Purpose participates in semantic comparison and can
   support broader-than/ narrower-than relationships.

   The initial core term set is:

   *  ppd:coreFunctionality: handling directly necessary to deliver the
      primary user-facing function of the device or service.

   *  ppd:remoteMonitoring: handling used to expose current or recent
      device or environment state to an authorized remote observer.

   *  ppd:motionDetection: handling used to detect, classify, or respond
      to motion or occupancy-related events.

   *  ppd:remoteViewing: handling used to present captured media or live
      capture output to an authorized remote viewer.

   *  ppd:productImprovement: handling used to improve the quality,
      reliability, or performance of the product or service beyond the
      immediate user session.

   *  ppd:analytics: handling used to derive operational, behavioral, or
      statistical insight beyond immediate device operation or
      troubleshooting.

   *  ppd:advertising: handling used to target, deliver, measure, or
      optimize promotional or marketing activity.

   *  ppd:diagnostics: handling used to troubleshoot, maintain, secure,
      or repair the device or service.

6.3.  Action (How)

   Action terms identify the privacy-relevant operation being performed.
   Unlike several of the other role-fillers, the baseline action family
   is intentionally flat rather than hierarchical.

   The initial core term set is:

   *  ppd:collection: acquiring, observing, or accepting data into the
      handling context of the participant or service.

   *  ppd:use: operating on data within the current handling context
      without disclosing it to a different recipient.

   *  ppd:transfer: disclosing, transmitting, or otherwise making data
      available to a different recipient or handling context.

   *  ppd:inference: deriving new data, classifications, or conclusions
      from existing data.

6.4.  Source (From Where)

   Source terms identify the origin of the handled data in the relevant
   processing path.  Source participates in semantic comparison and can
   support broader-than/narrower-than relationships.

   The initial core term set is:

   *  ppd:userInput: data intentionally provided by a user through
      direct interaction with the participant, service, or associated
      control surface.

   *  ppd:sensor: data directly observed from a sensing path associated
      with the participant or its environment.

   *  ppd:cameraSensor: data directly observed from an image- or video-
      capture sensing path.

   *  ppd:microphone: data directly observed from an audio-capture
      sensing path.

   *  ppd:derivedData: data whose immediate origin is prior data
      processing rather than direct user input or direct sensing.

6.5.  Destination (To Where)

   Destination terms identify the receiving endpoint or handling target
   to which the dataflow applies.  Destination participates in semantic
   comparison and can support broader-than/narrower-than relationships.

   The initial core term set is:

   *  ppd:localProcessing: a handling target that remains on the
      participant or within a household-local processing environment
      rather than a remote service.

   *  ppd:vendorCloud: a remote service environment operated by the
      device or service vendor.

   *  ppd:thirdPartyService: a remote service environment operated by an
      entity other than the device or service vendor.

   *  ppd:dataBroker: a recipient whose role includes acquiring,
      exchanging, or redisclosing data as a commercial data asset.

6.6.  Dataflow Qualifiers

   The baseline protocol also allows structured qualifiers through the
   constraints object.  This document defines the initial qualifier
   families used by that object.

   The protocol wire object remains named constraints, but its members
   are semantically qualifiers on atomic dataflows.

   Qualifier families are action-sensitive.  They are not a free-form
   bag of attributes that apply equally to every action.  A qualifier
   family is only valid where this document or a later specification
   defines its meaning for the relevant action context.  Baseline
   participant-facing uses that attach a qualifier family outside its
   defined applicability are invalid.

6.6.1.  Retention

   Retention qualifies how long the relevant data or resulting artifact
   may persist after the action in question.

   Retention is action-sensitive.  In particular:

   *  for collection, retention qualifies whether the collected result
      is allowed to persist after collection;

   *  for use, retention qualifies how long the data or resulting
      artifact may remain available for that use;

   *  for transfer, retention qualifies downstream persistence by the
      receiving side rather than only the sender's local storage
      duration; and

   *  for inference, retention qualifies how long inferred output may
      persist.

   The baseline retention model distinguishes two strong named poles:

   *  ppd:ephemeral

   *  ppd:indefinite

   ppd:ephemeral means the handling is not intended to result in durable
   persistence beyond the immediate handling context.

   ppd:indefinite means no bounded upper retention limit is expressed in
   the rule.

   Bounded retention periods are expected to require more specific
   quantitative refinements, including explicit duration values and
   units, in later revisions or deployment profiles.  The baseline
   compact participant-facing form defined here therefore standardizes
   only the categorical retention values above.

   Retention comparison does not use a generic taxonomy subsumption
   hierarchy in the same way as data_type, purpose, source, or
   destination.

6.6.2.  Processing Boundary

   Processing Boundary qualifies where a processing operation may
   execute or remain.  This family is most natural for use and
   inference.  It is not the primary semantic mechanism for describing
   transfer recipients, because destination already fills that role.

   In the baseline model, processing_boundary is therefore primarily a
   qualifier on use and inference dataflows rather than a general
   qualifier on transfer.

   The initial core term set is:

   *  ppd:onDeviceOnly: the relevant processing is constrained to
      execute on the participant device itself.

   *  ppd:inHomeOnly: the relevant processing is constrained to execute
      within the household-local trust boundary rather than in a remote
      service environment.

   *  ppd:approvedRemoteProcessing: the relevant processing is allowed
      to occur in an approved remote service environment.

   Processing Boundary participates in semantic comparison and can
   support broader-than/narrower-than relationships.

6.6.3.  Jurisdiction

   Jurisdiction qualifies the legal or regulatory domain relevant to the
   dataflow.  It is intended for cases where a policy needs to constrain
   the legal domain under which handling occurs, not merely the physical
   placement of a processor or store.

   Jurisdiction is intentionally not treated as a single flat label.
   Any use of a jurisdiction qualifier MUST identify the scoped subcase
   it constrains, such as:

   *  processing

   *  storage

   *  transfer

   The scoped subcase is part of the qualifier meaning.  A jurisdiction
   constraint on processing is not automatically equivalent to the same
   jurisdiction constraint on storage or transfer.

   For example:

   *  a processing-scoped jurisdiction qualifier can constrain the legal
      domain under which processing is permitted to occur;

   *  a storage-scoped jurisdiction qualifier can constrain the legal
      domain under which retained data may be kept; and

   *  a transfer-scoped jurisdiction qualifier can constrain the legal
      domain to which a transfer recipient may belong.

   This keeps the qualifier machine-comparable while still allowing
   broader sovereignty concerns to be expressed through more concrete
   baseline semantics.

   Jurisdiction participates in semantic comparison, but only within a
   clearly identified scoped subcase.

   This document defines the qualifier family and the scoped-semantics
   rule, but it does not yet define a closed baseline set of
   jurisdiction vocabulary values.

7.  Subsumption and Comparison

   Baseline comparison is not limited to exact token equality.

   For comparison-relevant role-fillers and qualifier families that
   participate in subsumption:

   *  a term can be broader than another term;

   *  a term can be narrower than another term; and

   *  two terms are equivalent when each subsumes the other.

   In the current baseline model:

   *  data_type participates in subsumption;

   *  purpose participates in subsumption;

   *  source participates in subsumption;

   *  destination participates in subsumption;

   *  processing_boundary participates in subsumption;

   *  jurisdiction participates in subsumption within a fixed scoped
      subcase;

   *  action remains a flat enumerable family and therefore compares by
      exact identity or exact reduction to a core action value rather
      than by broader-than/narrower-than subsumption; and

   *  retention uses its own categorical or quantitative comparison
      semantics rather than a generic taxonomy hierarchy.

   This document does not define a full conflict-resolution procedure.
   It defines the semantic basis that allows comparison to remain
   computable and interoperable.

8.  Identifier Model

8.1.  Stable Term Identifiers

   Stable term identifiers are the primary semantic hook in this
   taxonomy.  The baseline core vocabulary uses the reserved prefix
   ppd:. A term such as ppd:temperatureReading or ppd:localProcessing
   derives its meaning from the stable taxonomy definition associated
   with that identifier.

   A taxonomy release identifier can identify the vocabulary snapshot
   used for validation, reproducibility, or documentation.  For example,
   a deployment might use a release identifier such as ppd-core-2026-05.
   However, release metadata does not replace the term identifier itself
   as the source of meaning.

8.2.  Stability of Term Meanings

   Once published, a stable term identifier MUST NOT be silently
   reassigned an incompatible meaning in a later taxonomy release.

   Later releases MAY:

   *  add new terms;

   *  clarify the prose associated with an existing term when the
      clarification does not change its comparison semantics; and

   *  deprecate a term for future use while preserving its published
      meaning for reproducibility and comparison of existing content.

   If a later release needs materially different semantics, it MUST
   define a new term identifier rather than repurposing the old one.

8.3.  Compact Wire Form

   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol] defines compact term identifiers as
   the participant-facing wire format.  The protocol's Taxonomy Context
   Object carries:

   *  a taxonomy release identifier; and

   *  any required non-core prefix declarations.

   This keeps participant-facing messages compact while preserving
   stable semantics.

8.4.  Extension Namespaces and Core-Primitive Mapping

   Organizations MAY define additional terms outside the baseline ppd:
   vocabulary.  When such terms appear in participant-facing protocol
   messages, the sender MUST provide the required non-core prefix
   declarations through the protocol's taxonomy context.

   For comparison-relevant roles and qualifier families, namespace
   declaration alone is not enough.  When a non-core term fills
   data_type, purpose, action, source, or destination, or supplies a
   non-core retention, processing_boundary, or scoped jurisdiction
   qualifier value, that term MUST be defined with the semantic
   relationship or exact reduction by which it is reduced to one or more
   shared core concepts.

   That relationship can include equivalence or broader/narrower
   placement where the role participates in subsumption, or exact
   reduction where it does not, so long as it preserves computable
   comparison against the shared core floor.

   For example, an organization might define:

   *  vendorx:cameraStillFrame as a narrower data_type under
      ppd:videoFrame;

   *  vendorx:predictiveMaintenance as a narrower purpose under
      ppd:diagnostics; or

   *  vendorx:edgeHubOnly as a narrower processing_boundary under
      ppd:inHomeOnly.

   Such terms can be useful, but they remain baseline-interoperable only
   when their relationship to the relevant core roles is explicit enough
   that participants and household policy services can compare them
   meaningfully.

9.  Use in PPD Messages

   The protocol and taxonomy have different jobs:

   *  the protocol carries which atomic combinations a participant
      asserts or a household policy applies; and

   *  the taxonomy defines what the terms used in those combinations
      mean.

   This distinction matters.  A flat bag of supported data types,
   purposes, actions, and destinations is not enough to describe which
   combinations actually apply to a participant.  The protocol therefore
   carries atomic declaration statements and atomic policy rules, while
   this taxonomy defines the term spaces and qualifier meanings used in
   those objects.

   The protocol wire object for qualifiers is named constraints, but the
   semantics described here are qualifier semantics on those atomic
   dataflows.

   When those objects use non-core comparison-relevant terms, the
   objects remain baseline-computable only if those terms are reducible
   to the shared core model through the extension and mapping rules
   above.

   A declaration statement example is:

   {
     "statement_id": "temperature-product-improvement",
     "data_type": "ppd:temperatureReading",
     "purpose": "ppd:productImprovement",
     "action": "ppd:transfer",
     "source": "ppd:sensor",
     "destination": "ppd:vendorCloud",
     "constraints": {
       "retention": "ppd:indefinite"
     }
   }

   A corresponding effective-policy rule example is:

   {
     "rule_id": "r1",
     "data_type": "ppd:videoFrame",
     "purpose": "ppd:motionDetection",
     "action": "ppd:use",
     "source": "ppd:cameraSensor",
     "destination": "ppd:localProcessing",
     "effect": "allow",
     "constraints": {
       "processing_boundary": "ppd:onDeviceOnly"
     }
   }

   The taxonomy defines the meaning of the identifiers in these objects.
   The protocol defines how those objects are carried, validated,
   acknowledged, and kept current.

10.  Relationship to Richer Semantic Frameworks

   This taxonomy is intentionally lighter than a full ontology language
   or rights-expression framework.  Implementations MAY publish
   auxiliary representations, mappings, or tool-specific serializations
   when useful.  For example, organizations might maintain internal
   ontology, graph, or policy-analysis artifacts that map to the stable
   identifiers defined here.

   However, baseline participant-facing interoperability does not
   require OWL, RDF, JSON-LD, or comparable machinery on the wire.  The
   participant-facing contract remains compact term identifiers plus the
   protocol-defined taxonomy context, backed by the shared core semantic
   floor defined here.

11.  Security Considerations

   Semantic drift, ambiguous extensions, and unresolved terms can
   undermine privacy signaling even when transport security is strong.

   Organizations publishing extension vocabularies for comparison-
   relevant roles need stable meanings and explicit reduction back to
   the shared core primitives.  Participant-facing services and
   participants SHOULD NOT silently treat unresolved, unmapped, or
   unusable taxonomy terms as equivalent to known terms.

   When comparison-relevant extension terms cannot be reduced to the
   shared core, the correct baseline result is failure or indeterminate
   handling, not silent fallback to a broader local guess.

   When unresolved or unsupported terms appear in participant-facing
   protocol messages, the handling defined by
   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol] applies.  In particular, unresolved
   terms in normative policy content are more serious than unresolved
   descriptive detail because they can change the meaning of an allowed
   or denied handling path.

12.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no IANA actions.

13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

13.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-architecture]
              Smullen, D. and B. Scriber, "Privacy Preference
              Declaration for Home Networks", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-dsmullen-ppd-architecture-07, 20 May
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              dsmullen-ppd-architecture-07>.

   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol]
              Smullen, D. and B. Scriber, "Privacy Preference
              Declaration Protocol Specification", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol-01, 20 May
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              dsmullen-ppd-protocol-01>.

Acknowledgments

   The authors thank the participants in the related PPD architecture,
   protocol, and implementation discussions for the feedback that shaped
   this taxonomy direction.

Authors' Addresses

   Daniel Smullen
   CableLabs
   Email: d.smullen@cablelabs.com


   Brian Scriber
   CableLabs
   Email: brian.scriber@computer.org
