



Network Working Group                                         D. Smullen
Internet-Draft                                                B. Scriber
Intended status: Informational                                 CableLabs
Expires: 19 November 2026                                    18 May 2026


                Privacy Preference Declaration Taxonomy
                   draft-dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy-latest

Abstract

   This document defines the core vocabulary and extension model used by
   Privacy Preference Declarations (PPDs) to describe data handling in
   home networks.  It complements [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-architecture]
   and [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol] by standardizing term spaces
   for data types, purposes, actions, sources, destinations, and
   selected constraints.  Stable term identifiers are the primary
   semantic hook.  Baseline participant-facing protocol messages use
   compact identifiers plus taxonomy context rather than requiring full
   ontology exchange on the wire.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://drspangle.github.io/draft-dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy/draft-
   dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy.html.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-dsmullen-ppd-
   taxonomy/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/drspangle/draft-dsmullen-ppd-taxonomy.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 19 November 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Design Goals
   4.  Core Taxonomy Structure
     4.1.  Data Type (What)
     4.2.  Purpose (Why)
     4.3.  Action (How)
     4.4.  Source (From Where)
     4.5.  Destination (To Where)
     4.6.  Constraint Qualifiers
       4.6.1.  Retention
       4.6.2.  Locality
   5.  Identifier Model
     5.1.  Stable Term Identifiers
     5.2.  Compact Wire Form
     5.3.  Extension Namespaces and Core-Primitive Mapping
   6.  Use in PPD Messages
   7.  Relationship to Richer Semantic Frameworks
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  IANA Considerations
   10. References
     10.1.  Normative References
     10.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The Privacy Preference Declaration (PPD) architecture depends on a
   shared understanding of privacy-related semantics.
   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-architecture] defines the roles, trust
   boundaries, and lifecycle.  [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol] defines
   the participant-facing message flow and object structure.  This
   document defines the vocabulary those messages use.

   The baseline PPD protocol carries atomic descriptive statements from
   device-side participants and atomic effective-policy rules from the
   household side.  This taxonomy defines the meaning of the terms used
   in those statements and rules.  It does not define a household policy
   authoring workflow, a conflict-resolution procedure, or a full
   reasoning engine.

   The taxonomy is designed to be useful in constrained operational
   environments.  It therefore separates the stable meaning of terms
   from any richer external semantic framework that might also describe
   them.  Implementations can map these terms to richer vocabularies or
   ontology representations where useful, but such machinery is not
   required for baseline participant-facing interoperability.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Design Goals

   *  Semantic Clarity: Provide stable, unambiguous meanings for
      privacy-related terms used in PPD messages.

   *  Core Primitive Coverage: Standardize the dimensions needed by the
      baseline protocol rule and statement model.

   *  Compact Operational Use: Support compact identifiers in
      participant-facing JSON messages.

   *  Extensibility Without Fragmentation: Allow organization-specific
      vocabularies while requiring mapping back to shared core
      primitives.

   *  Validation and Comparison Support: Enable comparison of
      participant assertions and household policy without forcing every
      deployment to use a single heavy semantic framework.

   *  Interoperability: Preserve a shared vocabulary floor across
      vendors, device classes, and household deployments.

4.  Core Taxonomy Structure

   The baseline taxonomy consists of five core dimensions plus selected
   qualifier terms.  These dimensions are used together in atomic
   declaration statements and atomic effective-policy rules.

4.1.  Data Type (What)

   Data Type terms identify the kind of data being collected, used,
   transferred, retained, or deleted.

   Illustrative core terms include:

   *  ppd:temperatureReading

   *  ppd:videoFrame

   *  ppd:eventClip

   *  ppd:audioSample

   *  ppd:deviceIdentifier

4.2.  Purpose (Why)

   Purpose terms identify the reason or operational objective for the
   handling.

   Illustrative core terms include:

   *  ppd:coreFunctionality

   *  ppd:motionDetection

   *  ppd:remoteViewing

   *  ppd:analytics

   *  ppd:advertising

   *  ppd:diagnostics

4.3.  Action (How)

   Action terms identify what is being done with the data.

   Illustrative core terms include:

   *  ppd:collection

   *  ppd:usage

   *  ppd:transfer

   *  ppd:retention

   *  ppd:deletion

4.4.  Source (From Where)

   Source terms identify the origin of the handled data in the relevant
   processing path.

   Illustrative core terms include:

   *  ppd:userInput

   *  ppd:sensor

   *  ppd:cameraSensor

   *  ppd:microphone

   *  ppd:derivedData

4.5.  Destination (To Where)

   Destination terms identify the endpoint or trust boundary to which
   the handling applies.

   Illustrative core terms include:

   *  ppd:localProcessing

   *  ppd:vendorCloud

   *  ppd:thirdPartyPartner

   *  ppd:dataBroker

4.6.  Constraint Qualifiers

   The baseline protocol also allows structured qualifiers through the
   constraints object.  This document defines the initial qualifier term
   spaces used by that object.

4.6.1.  Retention

   Retention terms qualify how long the described or allowed handling
   can persist.

   Illustrative core terms include:

   *  ppd:ephemeral

   *  ppd:shortLived

   *  ppd:householdDefinedRetention

4.6.2.  Locality

   Locality terms qualify the trust boundary or placement within which
   the described or allowed handling can occur.

   Illustrative core terms include:

   *  ppd:inHomeOnly

   *  ppd:householdApprovedRemoteService

   *  ppd:thirdPartyProhibited

5.  Identifier Model

5.1.  Stable Term Identifiers

   Stable term identifiers are the primary semantic hook in this
   taxonomy.  The baseline core vocabulary uses the reserved prefix
   ppd:. A term such as ppd:temperatureReading or ppd:localProcessing
   derives its meaning from the stable taxonomy definition associated
   with that identifier.

   A taxonomy release identifier can identify the vocabulary snapshot
   used for validation, reproducibility, or documentation.  For example,
   a deployment might use a release identifier such as ppd-core-2026-05.
   However, release metadata does not replace the term identifier itself
   as the source of meaning.

5.2.  Compact Wire Form

   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol] defines compact term identifiers as
   the participant-facing wire format.  The protocol's Taxonomy Context
   Object carries:

   *  a taxonomy release identifier; and

   *  any required non-core prefix declarations.

   This keeps participant-facing messages compact while preserving
   stable semantics.

5.3.  Extension Namespaces and Core-Primitive Mapping

   Organizations MAY define additional terms outside the baseline ppd:
   vocabulary.  When such terms appear in participant-facing protocol
   messages, the sender MUST provide the required non-core prefix
   declarations through the protocol's taxonomy context.

   Extension terms SHOULD document how they map to the shared core
   primitives defined in this document.  That mapping is what allows
   vendor- or ecosystem-specific vocabulary to coexist with
   interoperable baseline processing.

   For example, an organization might define:

   *  vendorx:airQualityIndex

   *  vendorx:buildingOccupancyEstimate

   *  vendorx:regionalComplianceArchive

   Such terms can be useful, but they SHOULD still explain how they
   relate to shared core dimensions and qualifiers so that participants
   and household policy services can compare them meaningfully.

6.  Use in PPD Messages

   The protocol and taxonomy have different jobs:

   *  the protocol carries which atomic combinations a participant
      asserts or a household policy applies; and

   *  the taxonomy defines what the terms used in those combinations
      mean.

   This distinction matters.  A flat bag of supported data types,
   purposes, actions, and destinations is not enough to describe which
   combinations actually apply to a participant.  The protocol therefore
   carries atomic declaration statements and atomic policy rules, while
   this taxonomy defines the term spaces and qualifier meanings used in
   those objects.

   A declaration statement example is:

   {
     "statement_id": "event-clip-remote-viewing",
     "data_type": "ppd:eventClip",
     "purpose": "ppd:remoteViewing",
     "action": "ppd:transfer",
     "source": "ppd:cameraSensor",
     "destination": "ppd:vendorCloud",
     "constraints": {
       "retention": "ppd:shortLived"
     }
   }

   A corresponding effective-policy rule example is:

   {
     "rule_id": "r2",
     "data_type": "ppd:eventClip",
     "purpose": "ppd:remoteViewing",
     "action": "ppd:transfer",
     "source": "ppd:cameraSensor",
     "destination": "ppd:vendorCloud",
     "effect": "allow",
     "constraints": {
       "retention": "ppd:shortLived",
       "locality": "ppd:householdApprovedRemoteService"
     }
   }

   The taxonomy defines the meaning of the identifiers in these objects.
   The protocol defines how those objects are carried, validated,
   acknowledged, and kept current.

7.  Relationship to Richer Semantic Frameworks

   This taxonomy is intentionally lighter than a full ontology language
   or rights-expression framework.  Implementations MAY publish
   auxiliary representations, mappings, or tool-specific serializations
   when useful.  For example, organizations might maintain internal
   ontology, graph, or policy-analysis artifacts that map to the stable
   identifiers defined here.

   However, baseline participant-facing interoperability does not
   require OWL, RDF, JSON-LD, or comparable machinery on the wire.  The
   participant-facing contract remains compact term identifiers plus the
   protocol-defined taxonomy context.

8.  Security Considerations

   Semantic drift, ambiguous extensions, and unresolved terms can
   undermine privacy signaling even when transport security is strong.

   Organizations publishing extension vocabularies SHOULD document
   stable meanings and mappings back to shared core primitives.
   Participant-facing services and participants SHOULD NOT silently
   treat unresolved or unusable taxonomy terms as equivalent to known
   terms.

   When unresolved or unsupported terms appear in participant-facing
   protocol messages, the handling defined by
   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol] applies.  In particular, unresolved
   terms in normative policy content are more serious than unresolved
   descriptive detail because they can change the meaning of an allowed
   or denied handling path.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no IANA actions.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-architecture]
              Smullen, D. and B. Scriber, "Privacy Preference
              Declaration for Home Networks", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-dsmullen-ppd-architecture-05, 7 May
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              dsmullen-ppd-architecture-05>.

   [I-D.draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol]
              Smullen, D. and B. Scriber, "Privacy Preference
              Declaration Protocol Specification", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-dsmullen-ppd-protocol-00, 18 May
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              dsmullen-ppd-protocol-00>.

Acknowledgments

   The authors thank the participants in the related PPD architecture,
   protocol, and implementation discussions for the feedback that shaped
   this taxonomy direction.

Authors' Addresses

   Daniel Smullen
   CableLabs
   Email: d.smullen@cablelabs.com


   Brian Scriber
   CableLabs
   Email: brian.scriber@computer.org
